---
title: 170 - Two Sum III
tags: [easy, hash map, design]
---

We are asked to design a class with two method: `add(num)` and `find(target)`. The add operation is to add a number to the data structure. The find operation is to find if there exists any pair of numbers which sum is equal to the value. 

For example: `add(1); add(3); add(5);`, then `find(4) -> true; find(7) -> false;`. The two methods could be called alternately.

Similar to the original Two Sum problem, we can come up with a way to design this class. We maintain an **ArrayList** inside the class. Each time the add method is called, we just append the number to the end of the array, which is **O(1)**. When the find method is called, we do exactly the same thing as the solution of previous Two Sum problem, which is **O(n)**.

What if the find method is called much more frequently than the add method? The design above might be slow in this situation. In this case, we can optimize the find method by moving the processing ahead to the add method. In addition to the ArrayList, we maintain a **HashMap** to store all the combinations of the sums of current numbers. When the add method is called, we calculate all the sums of current number with every number in the array, and put them into HashMap, which takes **O(n)**. For the find method, we just take a look at the HashMap to see if the value is there, which takes **O(1)**. This approach is essentially a space-time tradeoff. The space complexity for the HashMap is gonna be O(n^2). So we are not be able to use this approach if memory is limited.

What else can we do? In real world, we can assume that there are a lot of duplicated find requests. That's to say, there find method might be called with the same value for many times. In this case, we can continue optimize it by introducing a HashMap as **cache** based on the first ArrayList approach. For the add method, we still just append it to the array. For the find method, we check the cache first. If the value is already in the cache, we return the reslut directly, which takes O(1). Otherwise, we do normal find process, which is O(n), and put the reslut into the cache. So we can achieve **O(1)** for both add and find method if cache is hit. The worst case for find method is still O(n). Of course we should limit the size of cache. There are many strageies to evict unused cache such as FIFO, LFU etc. We are not going to discuss this topic today.
