---
title: 1 - Two Sum
tags: [easy, hash map]
---

The most straightforward way is enumerating all possible sums of every pair of two numbers by using two nested-loop, which is **O(n^2)**.

When we take a look at the target and a number, we know exactly what is the other number we are looking for. For example, if we have the target 10 and a number 3, we know the other number is 7, which plus 3 equals to 10. We don't have to go through the whole array to find the 7. There are two approach to improve it.

```java
for (int i = 0; i < array.length; i++) {
    int a = array[i];
    int b = target - a; // looking for b
    
    if (found b in array) { // we use hash map or binary search to do the searching
        return solution;
    }
}
```

The first approach is **hash map**. We put each number to the map while we going through the array. For each number in the array, we just cheak the map to see if the the other number is already in the map. If not, we put the number into the map associating with its index, and goto the next iteration. If we found the complementary number in the map, it means we have met it before, so this pair is our answer. 

Since we go through the array once, for each number we only do put or get operation to the map. Each map operation is O(1). Therefore the total time complexity is **O(n)**.

```java
Map<Integer, Integer> map = new HashMap<>();
for (int i = 0; i < array.length; i++) {
    int a = array[i];
    int b = target - a;
    if (map.containsKey(b)) {
        // found the solution
        return the solution;
    }
    // put current number to the map
    map.put(a, i);
}
```

Another way is **binary search**. We sort the array firt, which is O(nlogn). Then we go through the array. For each number in the array, we do a binary search to the whole array, to see if we can find the complementary number. 

There are few things we should deal with for binary search approach. Note that the binary search might find the same number as itself. We must deal this situation since we can not use the same number twice. And to preserve the original index of each number after sorting, we must create a new array instead of the original array, with each element be a class, combining the number with its original index. 

This binary search approach is not very practical because of its coding complexity and time complexity. The sorting is O(nlogn). And for in the iteration, each number do a O(logn) binary search, which cost O(nlogn) too. So the total running time is **O(nlogn)**. But I'd like to talk about it for extending the mind.

Considering the corner cases, the length of array could be 0 or 1. The numbers could be negative. Also we should think about what if there could be more than one solution? Or no solution? How about we can use the same number twice? What if there are duplicated numbers in the array?
